Add Universal Assisted Generation (#2412)
huggingface/blog: universal_assisted_generation.md

Reviewer: The filename has to match the entry in `_blog.yml`, so it has to be `universal-assisted-generation.md` (dashes instead of underscores).

---
title: "Universal Assisted Generation: Enabling assisted generation with any assistant model"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/optimum_intel/intel_thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: danielkorat
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: orenpereg
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: moshew
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: jmamou
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: joaogante
- user: lewtun
- user: Nadav-Timor
  guest: true
  org: weizmannscience
---

# Universal Assisted Generation: Enabling assisted generation with any assistant model

> 🏎️ <em>TL;DR</em>: Many models such as `Llama-3.1-8B` lack a smaller version to use for [assisted generation](https://huggingface.co/blog/assisted-generation). In this blog post we present a method developed by Intel Labs and Hugging Face for using a small model **from any other model family** to accelerate inference by **1.5x-2.0x**! 🏎️

Author: > This isn't quite true now that there's a 1B model available. Perhaps we can pick a model that doesn't have a family, like `CohereForAI/c4ai-command-r-plus` or `mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3`?
> 
> 
> 
> ```suggestion
> 
> 🏎️ <em>TL;DR</em>: Many large language models such as `CohereForAI/c4ai-command-r-plus` lack a smaller version that can be used for [assisted generation](https://huggingface.co/blog/assisted-generation). In this blog post we present _Universal Assisted Generation (UAG)_, a method developed by Intel Labs and Hugging Face for using a small model **from any model family** to accelerate text generation by **1.5x-2.0x**! 🏎️
> 
> ```

@gante suggested 8b since the 1b would not be quite small enough hence suitable for AG. 
But maybe we can find a better example 👍

The unprecedented success of LLMs has redefined the limits of NLP. However, a major challenge in their deployment is optimizing performance to reduce their response time.
Speculative decoding is a very popular and practical approach for accelerating LLMs achieving considerable speedups.

> # Assisted Generation

Reviewer: The blog post title should be the only first-level heading, to ensure rendering and the auto-generated ToC are correct.

```suggestion
## Assisted Generation
```

Speculative decoding is an iterative process, during each cycle, the assistant model generates a sequence of tokens autoregressively, one at a time. The target model then verifies these assistant tokens in a single forward pass. The speedup is achieved by generating multiple tokens in each forward pass of the target model, rather than producing just one token at a time. For more detailed explanation see the original [blog post](https://huggingface.co/blog/assisted-generation).

The remarkable speedups offered by speculative decoding come with a significant drawback: the target and assistant models must share the same tokenizer, meaning they need to be from the same model family. However, many widely-used models lack smaller versions that are both compact and accurate enough to deliver substantial latency reductions. Based on our experience, meaningful speedups are typically seen when the size ratio between the target and assistant models is at least 50-100. For instance, `CodeLlama-13bB` lacks a smaller version, and `Gemma-2-9B` only has a 2B variant which is still not sufficiently small/fast to achieve significant performance improvements.

> # Universal Assisted Generation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Universal Assisted Generation
```

> In order to mitigate this pain point, Intel Labs together with our friends in Hugging face developed Universal Assisted Generation (UAG). UAG enables selecting any pair of target and assistant models regardless of their tokenizer. For example, `gemma-2-9b` can be used as target model together with `vicuna-68m` as assistant model. The main idea behind this method is 2-way tokenizer translations. Once the assistant model completes a generation iteration, the assistant tokens are converted to text, which is then tokenized using the target model's tokenizer to generate target tokens. After the verification step, the target tokens are similarly converted back to the assistant tokens format, which are then appended to the assistant model's context before the next iteration begins.

Reviewer 2: Does UAG also work for MoEs and can one mix a dense assistant model with a larger MoE? If yes, it would be cool to show some benchmark scores

```suggestion
In order to mitigate this pain point, Intel Labs together with our friends in Hugging face has developed Universal Assisted Generation (UAG). UAG enables selecting any pair of target and assistant models regardless of their tokenizer. For example, `gemma-2-9b` can be used as target model together with `vicuna-68m` as assistant model. The main idea behind this method is 2-way tokenizer translations. Once the assistant model completes a generation iteration, the assistant tokens are converted to text, which is then tokenized using the target model's tokenizer to generate target tokens. After the verification step, the target tokens are similarly converted back to the assistant tokens format, which are then appended to the assistant model's context before the next iteration begins.
```

Author: Good question, I will test it. It could be a great addition to the blog

Since the assistant and target tokenizers use different vocabularies it's necessary to handle the discrepancies between them. To accurately re-encode the newly generated assistant tokens, it’s essential to prepend a context window consisting of several previous tokens. This entire sequence is then re-encoded into the target token format and aligned with the most recent target tokens to pinpoint the exact location where the newly generated tokens should be appended. This process is illustrated in the video below.

<!-- [GIF 1 -- FWD PASS] -->
<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
    <video
        style="max-width: 80%; margin: auto;"
        autoplay loop muted playsinline
        src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/universal-assisted-generation/method-animation.mov"
    ></video>
</figure>

While not shown in the video above, token re-encoding from target to draft follows a similar process. However, mismatched tokens must be discarded from the assistant model's key-value (KV) cache to ensure data integrity.

> # Benchmarks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Benchmarks
```

The table below shows the latency improvements observed for target models when paired with assistant models using different tokenizers:

| Target model | Assistant model | Dataset | Task | Speedup |
|----------------------|---------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
| `codellama/CodeLlama-13b-Instruct-hf` | `bigcode/tiny_starcoder_py` | `openai/humaneval` | code generation | **1.90x** |
| `microsoft/Phi-3-medium-128k-instruct` | `Qwen/Qwen2-0.5B-Instruct`  | `tau/scrolls`   | long-context summarization | **1.91x** |
| `google/gemma-2-9b` | `double7/vicuna-68m`  | `cnn_dailymail`   | summarization | **1.76x** |

Note that the target models above do not have small variants which are suitable for acceleration usign standard assisted generation.

Experimental setup: 1 x A6000 GPU

## Code

> Universal Assisted Generation currently is currently in the `main` version of 🤗 Transformers. Install using:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Universal Assisted Generation currently is currently available in the `main` version of 🤗 Transformers. Install using:
```

---
title: "Universal Assisted Generation: Faster Decoding with Any Assistant Model"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/optimum_intel/intel_thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: danielkorat
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: orenpereg
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: mber
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: jmamou
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: joaogante
- user: lewtun
- user: Nadav-Timor
  guest: true
  org: weizmannscience
- user: moshew
  guest: true
  org: Intel
---

# Universal Assisted Generation: Faster Decoding with Any Assistant Model

🏎️ <em>TL;DR</em>: Many models such as `gemma-2-9b` lack a smaller version to use for [assisted generation](https://huggingface.co/blog/assisted-generation). In this blog post we present a method developed by Intel Labs and Hugging Face for using a small model **from any model family** to accelerate inference by **1.5x-2.0x**! 🏎️

## Introduction

> The unprecedented success of LLMs has redefined the limits of NLP. However, a major challenge in their deployment is optimizing performance to reduce their response time. Assisted generation, also known as [speculative decoding](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.17192), is a very popular and practical approach for accelerating LLMs achieving considerable speedups without accuracy loss.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion to rephrase the intro a bit:
```suggestion
Nowadays, the strongest open weight LLMs typically have billions to hundreds of billions parameters (hello Llama-3.1-405B 👋), and deploying these beasts in production environments poses a range of engineering challenges. One such challenge is that generating text from these large models is _slow_, which has prompted the community to developed a wide range of techniques to accelerate the decoding process. Assisted generation, also known as [speculative decoding](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.17192), is a very popular and practical approach for accelerating LLM inference without accuracy loss. In this blog post, we take a look at how assisted generation works and share our   research to extend it towards _any_ of the [140,000 language models](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text-generation&sort=trending) on the Hugging Face Hub 🚀! 
```

| `codellama/CodeLlama-13b-Instruct-hf` | `bigcode/tiny_starcoder_py` | [`openai/humaneval`](https://huggingface.co/openai/humaneval) | code generation | **1.90x** |
| `mistralai/Mixtral-8x22B-Instruct-v0.1` | `double7/vicuna-68m`  | [`cnn_dailymail`](https://huggingface.co/cnn_dailymail)   | summarization | **1.52x** |
| `google/gemma-2-9b` | `double7/vicuna-68m`  | [`cnn_dailymail`](https://huggingface.co/cnn_dailymail)   | summarization | **1.76x** |
| `meta-llama/Llama-3.1-70B` | `Qwen/Qwen2-0.5B-Instruct`  | [`tau/scrolls`](https://huggingface.co/tau/scrolls)   | long-context summarization | **1.78x** |
| `microsoft/Phi-3-medium-128k-instruct` | `Qwen/Qwen2-0.5B-Instruct`  | [`tau/scrolls`](https://huggingface.co/tau/scrolls)   | long-context summarization | **1.91x** |

Note that the target models above do not have small variants (under 1 billion parameters) which are suitable for acceleration using standard assisted generation.

Each experiment was conducted on 100 examples.
Experiments with `Llama` and `Mixtral` target models use 2 and 4 A100 GPUs, respectively. All other experiments ran with a single A6000 GPU.

## Code

> Dynamic speculation has been integrated into release [4.46.0](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/releases/tag/v4.46.0) of 🤗 Transformers.

Reviewer 2: Should it be called this for consistency?
```suggestion
Universal assisted generation has been integrated into release [4.46.0](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/releases/tag/v4.46.0) of 🤗 Transformers.
```

Author: This was a typo lol
good catch

thumbnail: /blog/assets/optimum_intel/intel_thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: danielkorat
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: orenpereg
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: mber
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: jmamou
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: joaogante
- user: lewtun
- user: Nadav-Timor
  guest: true
  org: weizmannscience
- user: moshew
  guest: true
  org: Intel
---

# Universal Assisted Generation: Faster Decoding with Any Assistant Model

🏎️ <em>TL;DR</em>: Many models such as `gemma-2-9b` lack a smaller version to use for [assisted generation](https://huggingface.co/blog/assisted-generation). In this blog post we present a method developed by Intel Labs and Hugging Face for using a small model **from any model family** to accelerate inference by **1.5x-2.0x**! 🏎️

## Introduction

The unprecedented success of LLMs has redefined the limits of NLP. However, a major challenge in their deployment is optimizing performance to reduce their response time.
[Speculative decoding](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.17192) is a very popular and practical approach for accelerating LLMs achieving considerable speedups.

## Assisted Generation
 

> The core idea behind speculative decoding involves using a pair of models, referred to as the _target_ and _assistant_ models. The assistant model is a smaller, more efficient version of the target model, for example using `Llama-3.2-1B` as the assistant model for the larger `Llama-3.1-70b` target model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The core idea behind assisted generation, also known as speculative decoding, involves using a pair of models, referred to as the _target_ and _assistant_ models. The assistant model is a smaller, more efficient version of the target model, for example you can use `Llama-3.2-1B` as the assistant model for the larger `Llama-3.1-70b` target model.
```

(We've been referring to "assisted generation" up until this point)

> Speculative decoding is an iterative process, during each cycle, the assistant model generates a sequence of tokens autoregressively, one at a time. The target model then verifies these assistant tokens in a single forward pass. The speedup is achieved by generating multiple tokens in each forward pass of the target model, rather than producing just one token at a time. For more detailed explanation see the original [blog post](https://huggingface.co/blog/assisted-generation). Combined with the recently introduced [Dynamic Speculation](https://huggingface.co/blog/dynamic_speculation_lookahead) strategy, assisted generation accelerates text generation by up 1.5x-3x, depending on the task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Speculative decoding is an iterative process. Each cycle, the assistant model generates a sequence of tokens autoregressively, one at a time. The target model then verifies all the assistant tokens in the sequence in a single forward pass. The speedup is achieved by confirming multiple tokens in each forward pass of the target model, rather than producing just one token at a time. For a more detailed explanation, see the original [blog post](https://huggingface.co/blog/assisted-generation). Combined with the recently introduced [Dynamic Speculation](https://huggingface.co/blog/dynamic_speculation_lookahead) strategy, assisted generation accelerates text generation by up 1.5x-3x, depending on the task and the models used.
```

> Speculative decoding is an iterative process. Each cycle, the assistant model generates a sequence of tokens autoregressively, one at a time. The target model then verifies all the assistant tokens in the sequence in a single forward pass. The speedup is achieved by confirming multiple tokens in each forward pass of the target model, rather than producing just one token at a time. For a more detailed explanation, see the original [blog post](https://huggingface.co/blog/assisted-generation). Combined with the recently introduced [Dynamic Speculation](https://huggingface.co/blog/dynamic_speculation_lookahead) strategy, assisted generation accelerates text generation by 1.5x-3x, depending on the task and the models used.

Reviewer: Speculative decoding not defined yet, maybe keep using "assisted generation"?

Author: thanks :)

The remarkable speedups offered by speculative decoding come with a significant drawback: the target and assistant models must share the same tokenizer, meaning they need to be from the same model family. However, many widely-used models lack smaller versions that are both compact and accurate enough to deliver substantial latency reductions. Based on our experience, meaningful speedups are typically seen when the assistant model is at least 50-100 times smaller than the target one. For instance, `CodeLlama-13b` lacks a smaller version, and `gemma-2-9b` only has a `2b` variant which is still not sufficiently small/fast to achieve significant performance improvements.

## Universal Assisted Generation
 

> In order to mitigate this pain point, Intel Labs, together with our friends at Hugging Face has developed Universal Assisted Generation (UAG). UAG enables selecting any pair of target and assistant models regardless of their tokenizer. For example, `gemma-2-9b` can be used as target model together with `vicuna-68m` as assistant model. The main idea behind this method is 2-way tokenizer translations. Once the assistant model completes a generation iteration, the assistant tokens are converted to text, which is then tokenized using the target model's tokenizer to generate target tokens. After the verification step, the target tokens are similarly converted back to the assistant tokens format, which are then appended to the assistant model's context before the next iteration begins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to mitigate this pain point, Intel Labs, together with our friends at Hugging Face, has developed Universal Assisted Generation (UAG). UAG enables selecting any pair of target and assistant models regardless of their tokenizer. For example, `gemma-2-9b` can be used as the target model, with the tiny `vicuna-68m` as the assistant.

The main idea behind the method we propose is 2-way tokenizer translations. Once the assistant model completes a generation iteration, the assistant tokens are converted to text, which is then tokenized using the target model's tokenizer to generate target tokens. After the verification step, the target tokens are similarly converted back to the assistant tokens format, which are then appended to the assistant model's context before the next iteration begins.
```

Links to the models in the Hub could be useful.

Experimental setup: 1 x A6000 GPU

## Code

Universal Assisted Generation is currently available in the `main` version of 🤗 Transformers. Install using:

```bash
pip install git+https://github.com/huggingface/transformers
```

To use, pass `tokenizer` and `assistant_tokenizer` to `generate()`:

```python
>>> from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer

>>> prompt = "Alice and Bob"
>>> checkpoint = "google/gemma-2-9b"
>>> assistant_checkpoint = "double7/vicuna-68m"

>>> assistant_tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(assistant_checkpoint)
>>> tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(checkpoint)
>>> inputs = tokenizer(prompt, return_tensors="pt")

>>> model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(checkpoint)
>>> assistant_model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(assistant_checkpoint)
>>> outputs = model.generate(**inputs, assistant_model=assistant_model, tokenizer=tokenizer, assistant_tokenizer=assistant_tokenizer)
>>> tokenizer.batch_decode(outputs, skip_special_tokens=True)
['Alice and Bob are sitting in a bar. Alice is drinking a beer and Bob is drinking a']
```

## Future Directions

> While UAG supports multinomial sampling by passing `do_sample=True`, it does not support rejection sampling, which guarantees similar token distributions for speculative and greedy generations.

Reviewer 3: Reading this line, I would say that assisted decoding does not guarantee the target model's token probability distributions are preserved, which is not the case. 

Also, rejection sampling != speculative sampling (see [section A2](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2211.17192))

I would rewrite it to something like:
"
While UAG supports multinomial sampling by passing `do_sample=True`, it does not support speculative sampling. Contrarily to the case with speculative sampling, if the target model doesn't sample the same token, the token is automatically rejected. In practice, this means that UAG with `do_sample=True` will have a lower throughput compared to the case where the assistant has the same tokenizer. 
"

> We plan to enhance UAG by adding this feature. 

Reviewer: Maybe to revisit if João's suggestion above is incorporated.

> While passing `do_sample=True` with standard assisted generation uses speculative sampling ([Algorithm 1](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2211.17192.pdf)), UAG 

Reviewer: ah, so "speculative sampling" is not the same as "speculative decoding". Maybe call a bit more attention to it
```suggestion
While passing `do_sample=True` with standard assisted generation uses the speculative sampling algorithm ([Algorithm 1 from the paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2211.17192.pdf)), UAG 
```
